
Bonus 1: 	Now translate "trying" in that sentence. Conantes / 
temptantes

Bonus 2:	Now translate "all of you" in that sentence. Omnes vos.

2.	 When Cicero said to Catiline magno me metu liberabis, dum modo 
inter me atque te murus intersit what use of the ablative are we 
seeing? Ablative of separation.

	Bonus 1:	What was Cicero telling Catiline in this sentence? That 
Catiline would free him from fear only when a wall stood between 
them.

Bonus 2: 	When Cicero says egredere aliquando ex urbe; patent portae;
 proficiscere, what is the grammar of egredere and proficiscere? 
Imperatives (of deponent verbs).

3.	 What high office of Roman government went out of use during the 
late Republic, to be introduced again only under the emperors? The 
censorship.

Bonus 1:	How often were censors normally elected? Every 5 years.

Bonus 2: 	How long did they serve? 18 months.

4.	 In Latin, what case is used for price, material, and origin? 
Ablative.

Bonus 1: 	What two cases may used for agency? Ablative and Dative.

Bonus 2:	What two cases may be used for description? Genitive and 
Ablative.

5.	 Who am I? I was so well-known in the upper world that I was 
often referred to simply as canis. Hesiod said I was a child of 
Echidna and Typhon, and thought I had 50 heads, but most people said 
I had only 3. Hercules managed to drag me from my post. Cerberus.

Bonus 1:	Cerberus had a peculiar shaggy mane that was known to 
sprout what creatures? Serpents.

Bonus 2:	Hercules captured me, and Psyche put me to sleep with 
drugged cakes. But how did Orpheus manage to get past me? He lulled 
him to sleep with music.

6.	 What do audeo, gaudeo, soleo and fido have in common? They are 
semi-deponents.

Bonus 1:	Give me the principals parts of audeo. audeo, audere, ausus sum

Bonus 2: 	Give me the principals parts of fido. fido, fidere, fisus sum

7.	 Who was Emperor when Christ was crucified? Tiberius.

Bonus 1: 	Who was emperor when Christ was born? Augustus.

Bonus 2: 	Who was emperor when the Peter and Paul were martyred? 
Nero.

8.	 What playwright who lived through the dark days of the 2nd Punic 
War nevertheless wrote some of the best Roman comedies? Plautus.

Bonus 1: 	What writer immortalized the scandals of the 
Julio-Claudian emperors in a series of biographies? Suetonius.

Bonus 2: 	What writer of the High Empire stole the name of Ovid's 
greatest work and told the tale of Lucius transformed? 
Apuleius.

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 2:	Now translate "all of you" in that sentence. Omnes vos.

2.	 When Cicero said to Catiline magno me metu liberabis, dum modo 
inter me atque te murus intersit what use of the ablative are we 
seeing? Ablative of separation.

	Bonus 1:	What was Cicero telling Catiline in this sentence? That 
Catiline would free him from fear only when a wall stood between 
them.

Bonus 2: 	When Cicero says egredere aliquando ex urbe; patent portae;
 proficiscere, what is the grammar of egredere and proficiscere? 
Imperatives (of deponent verbs).

3.	 What high office of Roman government went out of use during the 
late Republic, to be introduced again only under the emperors? The 
censorship.

Bonus 1:	How often were censors normally elected? Every 5 years.

Bonus 2: 	How long did they serve? 18 months.

4.	 In Latin, what case is used for price, material, and origin? 
Ablative.

Bonus 1: 	What two cases may used for agency? Ablative and Dative.

Bonus 2:	What two cases may be used for description? Genitive and 
Ablative.

5.	 Who am I? I was so well-known in the upper world that I was 
often referred to simply as canis. Hesiod said I was a child of 
Echidna and Typhon, and thought I had 50 heads, but most people said 
I had only 3. Hercules managed to drag me from my post. Cerberus.

Bonus 1:	Cerberus had a peculiar shaggy mane that was known to 
sprout what creatures? Serpents.

Bonus 2:	Hercules captured me, and Psyche put me to sleep with 
drugged cakes. But how did Orpheus manage to get past me? He lulled 
him to sleep with music.

6.	 What do audeo, gaudeo, soleo and fido have in common? They are 
semi-deponents.

Bonus 1:	Give me the principals parts of audeo. audeo, audere, ausus sum

Bonus 2: 	Give me the principals parts of fido. fido, fidere, fisus sum

7.	 Who was Emperor when Christ was crucified? Tiberius.

Bonus 1: 	Who was emperor when Christ was born? Augustus.

Bonus 2: 	Who was emperor when the Peter and Paul were martyred? 
Nero.

8.	 What playwright who lived through the dark days of the 2nd Punic 
War nevertheless wrote some of the best Roman comedies? Plautus.

Bonus 1: 	What writer immortalized the scandals of the 
Julio-Claudian emperors in a series of biographies? Suetonius.

Bonus 2: 	What writer of the High Empire stole the name of Ovid's 
greatest work and told the tale of Lucius transformed? 
Apuleius.

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

2.	 When Cicero said to Catiline magno me metu liberabis, dum modo 
inter me atque te murus intersit what use of the ablative are we 
seeing? Ablative of separation.

	Bonus 1:	What was Cicero telling Catiline in this sentence? That 
Catiline would free him from fear only when a wall stood between 
them.

Bonus 2: 	When Cicero says egredere aliquando ex urbe; patent portae;
 proficiscere, what is the grammar of egredere and proficiscere? 
Imperatives (of deponent verbs).

3.	 What high office of Roman government went out of use during the 
late Republic, to be introduced again only under the emperors? The 
censorship.

Bonus 1:	How often were censors normally elected? Every 5 years.

Bonus 2: 	How long did they serve? 18 months.

4.	 In Latin, what case is used for price, material, and origin? 
Ablative.

Bonus 1: 	What two cases may used for agency? Ablative and Dative.

Bonus 2:	What two cases may be used for description? Genitive and 
Ablative.

5.	 Who am I? I was so well-known in the upper world that I was 
often referred to simply as canis. Hesiod said I was a child of 
Echidna and Typhon, and thought I had 50 heads, but most people said 
I had only 3. Hercules managed to drag me from my post. Cerberus.

Bonus 1:	Cerberus had a peculiar shaggy mane that was known to 
sprout what creatures? Serpents.

Bonus 2:	Hercules captured me, and Psyche put me to sleep with 
drugged cakes. But how did Orpheus manage to get past me? He lulled 
him to sleep with music.

6.	 What do audeo, gaudeo, soleo and fido have in common? They are 
semi-deponents.

Bonus 1:	Give me the principals parts of audeo. audeo, audere, ausus sum

Bonus 2: 	Give me the principals parts of fido. fido, fidere, fisus sum

7.	 Who was Emperor when Christ was crucified? Tiberius.

Bonus 1: 	Who was emperor when Christ was born? Augustus.

Bonus 2: 	Who was emperor when the Peter and Paul were martyred? 
Nero.

8.	 What playwright who lived through the dark days of the 2nd Punic 
War nevertheless wrote some of the best Roman comedies? Plautus.

Bonus 1: 	What writer immortalized the scandals of the 
Julio-Claudian emperors in a series of biographies? Suetonius.

Bonus 2: 	What writer of the High Empire stole the name of Ovid's 
greatest work and told the tale of Lucius transformed? 
Apuleius.

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

	Bonus 1:	What was Cicero telling Catiline in this sentence? That 
Catiline would free him from fear only when a wall stood between 
them.

Bonus 2: 	When Cicero says egredere aliquando ex urbe; patent portae;
 proficiscere, what is the grammar of egredere and proficiscere? 
Imperatives (of deponent verbs).

3.	 What high office of Roman government went out of use during the 
late Republic, to be introduced again only under the emperors? The 
censorship.

Bonus 1:	How often were censors normally elected? Every 5 years.

Bonus 2: 	How long did they serve? 18 months.

4.	 In Latin, what case is used for price, material, and origin? 
Ablative.

Bonus 1: 	What two cases may used for agency? Ablative and Dative.

Bonus 2:	What two cases may be used for description? Genitive and 
Ablative.

5.	 Who am I? I was so well-known in the upper world that I was 
often referred to simply as canis. Hesiod said I was a child of 
Echidna and Typhon, and thought I had 50 heads, but most people said 
I had only 3. Hercules managed to drag me from my post. Cerberus.

Bonus 1:	Cerberus had a peculiar shaggy mane that was known to 
sprout what creatures? Serpents.

Bonus 2:	Hercules captured me, and Psyche put me to sleep with 
drugged cakes. But how did Orpheus manage to get past me? He lulled 
him to sleep with music.

6.	 What do audeo, gaudeo, soleo and fido have in common? They are 
semi-deponents.

Bonus 1:	Give me the principals parts of audeo. audeo, audere, ausus sum

Bonus 2: 	Give me the principals parts of fido. fido, fidere, fisus sum

7.	 Who was Emperor when Christ was crucified? Tiberius.

Bonus 1: 	Who was emperor when Christ was born? Augustus.

Bonus 2: 	Who was emperor when the Peter and Paul were martyred? 
Nero.

8.	 What playwright who lived through the dark days of the 2nd Punic 
War nevertheless wrote some of the best Roman comedies? Plautus.

Bonus 1: 	What writer immortalized the scandals of the 
Julio-Claudian emperors in a series of biographies? Suetonius.

Bonus 2: 	What writer of the High Empire stole the name of Ovid's 
greatest work and told the tale of Lucius transformed? 
Apuleius.

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 2: 	When Cicero says egredere aliquando ex urbe; patent portae;
 proficiscere, what is the grammar of egredere and proficiscere? 
Imperatives (of deponent verbs).

3.	 What high office of Roman government went out of use during the 
late Republic, to be introduced again only under the emperors? The 
censorship.

Bonus 1:	How often were censors normally elected? Every 5 years.

Bonus 2: 	How long did they serve? 18 months.

4.	 In Latin, what case is used for price, material, and origin? 
Ablative.

Bonus 1: 	What two cases may used for agency? Ablative and Dative.

Bonus 2:	What two cases may be used for description? Genitive and 
Ablative.

5.	 Who am I? I was so well-known in the upper world that I was 
often referred to simply as canis. Hesiod said I was a child of 
Echidna and Typhon, and thought I had 50 heads, but most people said 
I had only 3. Hercules managed to drag me from my post. Cerberus.

Bonus 1:	Cerberus had a peculiar shaggy mane that was known to 
sprout what creatures? Serpents.

Bonus 2:	Hercules captured me, and Psyche put me to sleep with 
drugged cakes. But how did Orpheus manage to get past me? He lulled 
him to sleep with music.

6.	 What do audeo, gaudeo, soleo and fido have in common? They are 
semi-deponents.

Bonus 1:	Give me the principals parts of audeo. audeo, audere, ausus sum

Bonus 2: 	Give me the principals parts of fido. fido, fidere, fisus sum

7.	 Who was Emperor when Christ was crucified? Tiberius.

Bonus 1: 	Who was emperor when Christ was born? Augustus.

Bonus 2: 	Who was emperor when the Peter and Paul were martyred? 
Nero.

8.	 What playwright who lived through the dark days of the 2nd Punic 
War nevertheless wrote some of the best Roman comedies? Plautus.

Bonus 1: 	What writer immortalized the scandals of the 
Julio-Claudian emperors in a series of biographies? Suetonius.

Bonus 2: 	What writer of the High Empire stole the name of Ovid's 
greatest work and told the tale of Lucius transformed? 
Apuleius.

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

3.	 What high office of Roman government went out of use during the 
late Republic, to be introduced again only under the emperors? The 
censorship.

Bonus 1:	How often were censors normally elected? Every 5 years.

Bonus 2: 	How long did they serve? 18 months.

4.	 In Latin, what case is used for price, material, and origin? 
Ablative.

Bonus 1: 	What two cases may used for agency? Ablative and Dative.

Bonus 2:	What two cases may be used for description? Genitive and 
Ablative.

5.	 Who am I? I was so well-known in the upper world that I was 
often referred to simply as canis. Hesiod said I was a child of 
Echidna and Typhon, and thought I had 50 heads, but most people said 
I had only 3. Hercules managed to drag me from my post. Cerberus.

Bonus 1:	Cerberus had a peculiar shaggy mane that was known to 
sprout what creatures? Serpents.

Bonus 2:	Hercules captured me, and Psyche put me to sleep with 
drugged cakes. But how did Orpheus manage to get past me? He lulled 
him to sleep with music.

6.	 What do audeo, gaudeo, soleo and fido have in common? They are 
semi-deponents.

Bonus 1:	Give me the principals parts of audeo. audeo, audere, ausus sum

Bonus 2: 	Give me the principals parts of fido. fido, fidere, fisus sum

7.	 Who was Emperor when Christ was crucified? Tiberius.

Bonus 1: 	Who was emperor when Christ was born? Augustus.

Bonus 2: 	Who was emperor when the Peter and Paul were martyred? 
Nero.

8.	 What playwright who lived through the dark days of the 2nd Punic 
War nevertheless wrote some of the best Roman comedies? Plautus.

Bonus 1: 	What writer immortalized the scandals of the 
Julio-Claudian emperors in a series of biographies? Suetonius.

Bonus 2: 	What writer of the High Empire stole the name of Ovid's 
greatest work and told the tale of Lucius transformed? 
Apuleius.

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 1:	How often were censors normally elected? Every 5 years.

Bonus 2: 	How long did they serve? 18 months.

4.	 In Latin, what case is used for price, material, and origin? 
Ablative.

Bonus 1: 	What two cases may used for agency? Ablative and Dative.

Bonus 2:	What two cases may be used for description? Genitive and 
Ablative.

5.	 Who am I? I was so well-known in the upper world that I was 
often referred to simply as canis. Hesiod said I was a child of 
Echidna and Typhon, and thought I had 50 heads, but most people said 
I had only 3. Hercules managed to drag me from my post. Cerberus.

Bonus 1:	Cerberus had a peculiar shaggy mane that was known to 
sprout what creatures? Serpents.

Bonus 2:	Hercules captured me, and Psyche put me to sleep with 
drugged cakes. But how did Orpheus manage to get past me? He lulled 
him to sleep with music.

6.	 What do audeo, gaudeo, soleo and fido have in common? They are 
semi-deponents.

Bonus 1:	Give me the principals parts of audeo. audeo, audere, ausus sum

Bonus 2: 	Give me the principals parts of fido. fido, fidere, fisus sum

7.	 Who was Emperor when Christ was crucified? Tiberius.

Bonus 1: 	Who was emperor when Christ was born? Augustus.

Bonus 2: 	Who was emperor when the Peter and Paul were martyred? 
Nero.

8.	 What playwright who lived through the dark days of the 2nd Punic 
War nevertheless wrote some of the best Roman comedies? Plautus.

Bonus 1: 	What writer immortalized the scandals of the 
Julio-Claudian emperors in a series of biographies? Suetonius.

Bonus 2: 	What writer of the High Empire stole the name of Ovid's 
greatest work and told the tale of Lucius transformed? 
Apuleius.

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 2: 	How long did they serve? 18 months.

4.	 In Latin, what case is used for price, material, and origin? 
Ablative.

Bonus 1: 	What two cases may used for agency? Ablative and Dative.

Bonus 2:	What two cases may be used for description? Genitive and 
Ablative.

5.	 Who am I? I was so well-known in the upper world that I was 
often referred to simply as canis. Hesiod said I was a child of 
Echidna and Typhon, and thought I had 50 heads, but most people said 
I had only 3. Hercules managed to drag me from my post. Cerberus.

Bonus 1:	Cerberus had a peculiar shaggy mane that was known to 
sprout what creatures? Serpents.

Bonus 2:	Hercules captured me, and Psyche put me to sleep with 
drugged cakes. But how did Orpheus manage to get past me? He lulled 
him to sleep with music.

6.	 What do audeo, gaudeo, soleo and fido have in common? They are 
semi-deponents.

Bonus 1:	Give me the principals parts of audeo. audeo, audere, ausus sum

Bonus 2: 	Give me the principals parts of fido. fido, fidere, fisus sum

7.	 Who was Emperor when Christ was crucified? Tiberius.

Bonus 1: 	Who was emperor when Christ was born? Augustus.

Bonus 2: 	Who was emperor when the Peter and Paul were martyred? 
Nero.

8.	 What playwright who lived through the dark days of the 2nd Punic 
War nevertheless wrote some of the best Roman comedies? Plautus.

Bonus 1: 	What writer immortalized the scandals of the 
Julio-Claudian emperors in a series of biographies? Suetonius.

Bonus 2: 	What writer of the High Empire stole the name of Ovid's 
greatest work and told the tale of Lucius transformed? 
Apuleius.

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

4.	 In Latin, what case is used for price, material, and origin? 
Ablative.

Bonus 1: 	What two cases may used for agency? Ablative and Dative.

Bonus 2:	What two cases may be used for description? Genitive and 
Ablative.

5.	 Who am I? I was so well-known in the upper world that I was 
often referred to simply as canis. Hesiod said I was a child of 
Echidna and Typhon, and thought I had 50 heads, but most people said 
I had only 3. Hercules managed to drag me from my post. Cerberus.

Bonus 1:	Cerberus had a peculiar shaggy mane that was known to 
sprout what creatures? Serpents.

Bonus 2:	Hercules captured me, and Psyche put me to sleep with 
drugged cakes. But how did Orpheus manage to get past me? He lulled 
him to sleep with music.

6.	 What do audeo, gaudeo, soleo and fido have in common? They are 
semi-deponents.

Bonus 1:	Give me the principals parts of audeo. audeo, audere, ausus sum

Bonus 2: 	Give me the principals parts of fido. fido, fidere, fisus sum

7.	 Who was Emperor when Christ was crucified? Tiberius.

Bonus 1: 	Who was emperor when Christ was born? Augustus.

Bonus 2: 	Who was emperor when the Peter and Paul were martyred? 
Nero.

8.	 What playwright who lived through the dark days of the 2nd Punic 
War nevertheless wrote some of the best Roman comedies? Plautus.

Bonus 1: 	What writer immortalized the scandals of the 
Julio-Claudian emperors in a series of biographies? Suetonius.

Bonus 2: 	What writer of the High Empire stole the name of Ovid's 
greatest work and told the tale of Lucius transformed? 
Apuleius.

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 1: 	What two cases may used for agency? Ablative and Dative.

Bonus 2:	What two cases may be used for description? Genitive and 
Ablative.

5.	 Who am I? I was so well-known in the upper world that I was 
often referred to simply as canis. Hesiod said I was a child of 
Echidna and Typhon, and thought I had 50 heads, but most people said 
I had only 3. Hercules managed to drag me from my post. Cerberus.

Bonus 1:	Cerberus had a peculiar shaggy mane that was known to 
sprout what creatures? Serpents.

Bonus 2:	Hercules captured me, and Psyche put me to sleep with 
drugged cakes. But how did Orpheus manage to get past me? He lulled 
him to sleep with music.

6.	 What do audeo, gaudeo, soleo and fido have in common? They are 
semi-deponents.

Bonus 1:	Give me the principals parts of audeo. audeo, audere, ausus sum

Bonus 2: 	Give me the principals parts of fido. fido, fidere, fisus sum

7.	 Who was Emperor when Christ was crucified? Tiberius.

Bonus 1: 	Who was emperor when Christ was born? Augustus.

Bonus 2: 	Who was emperor when the Peter and Paul were martyred? 
Nero.

8.	 What playwright who lived through the dark days of the 2nd Punic 
War nevertheless wrote some of the best Roman comedies? Plautus.

Bonus 1: 	What writer immortalized the scandals of the 
Julio-Claudian emperors in a series of biographies? Suetonius.

Bonus 2: 	What writer of the High Empire stole the name of Ovid's 
greatest work and told the tale of Lucius transformed? 
Apuleius.

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 2:	What two cases may be used for description? Genitive and 
Ablative.

5.	 Who am I? I was so well-known in the upper world that I was 
often referred to simply as canis. Hesiod said I was a child of 
Echidna and Typhon, and thought I had 50 heads, but most people said 
I had only 3. Hercules managed to drag me from my post. Cerberus.

Bonus 1:	Cerberus had a peculiar shaggy mane that was known to 
sprout what creatures? Serpents.

Bonus 2:	Hercules captured me, and Psyche put me to sleep with 
drugged cakes. But how did Orpheus manage to get past me? He lulled 
him to sleep with music.

6.	 What do audeo, gaudeo, soleo and fido have in common? They are 
semi-deponents.

Bonus 1:	Give me the principals parts of audeo. audeo, audere, ausus sum

Bonus 2: 	Give me the principals parts of fido. fido, fidere, fisus sum

7.	 Who was Emperor when Christ was crucified? Tiberius.

Bonus 1: 	Who was emperor when Christ was born? Augustus.

Bonus 2: 	Who was emperor when the Peter and Paul were martyred? 
Nero.

8.	 What playwright who lived through the dark days of the 2nd Punic 
War nevertheless wrote some of the best Roman comedies? Plautus.

Bonus 1: 	What writer immortalized the scandals of the 
Julio-Claudian emperors in a series of biographies? Suetonius.

Bonus 2: 	What writer of the High Empire stole the name of Ovid's 
greatest work and told the tale of Lucius transformed? 
Apuleius.

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

5.	 Who am I? I was so well-known in the upper world that I was 
often referred to simply as canis. Hesiod said I was a child of 
Echidna and Typhon, and thought I had 50 heads, but most people said 
I had only 3. Hercules managed to drag me from my post. Cerberus.

Bonus 1:	Cerberus had a peculiar shaggy mane that was known to 
sprout what creatures? Serpents.

Bonus 2:	Hercules captured me, and Psyche put me to sleep with 
drugged cakes. But how did Orpheus manage to get past me? He lulled 
him to sleep with music.

6.	 What do audeo, gaudeo, soleo and fido have in common? They are 
semi-deponents.

Bonus 1:	Give me the principals parts of audeo. audeo, audere, ausus sum

Bonus 2: 	Give me the principals parts of fido. fido, fidere, fisus sum

7.	 Who was Emperor when Christ was crucified? Tiberius.

Bonus 1: 	Who was emperor when Christ was born? Augustus.

Bonus 2: 	Who was emperor when the Peter and Paul were martyred? 
Nero.

8.	 What playwright who lived through the dark days of the 2nd Punic 
War nevertheless wrote some of the best Roman comedies? Plautus.

Bonus 1: 	What writer immortalized the scandals of the 
Julio-Claudian emperors in a series of biographies? Suetonius.

Bonus 2: 	What writer of the High Empire stole the name of Ovid's 
greatest work and told the tale of Lucius transformed? 
Apuleius.

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 1:	Cerberus had a peculiar shaggy mane that was known to 
sprout what creatures? Serpents.

Bonus 2:	Hercules captured me, and Psyche put me to sleep with 
drugged cakes. But how did Orpheus manage to get past me? He lulled 
him to sleep with music.

6.	 What do audeo, gaudeo, soleo and fido have in common? They are 
semi-deponents.

Bonus 1:	Give me the principals parts of audeo. audeo, audere, ausus sum

Bonus 2: 	Give me the principals parts of fido. fido, fidere, fisus sum

7.	 Who was Emperor when Christ was crucified? Tiberius.

Bonus 1: 	Who was emperor when Christ was born? Augustus.

Bonus 2: 	Who was emperor when the Peter and Paul were martyred? 
Nero.

8.	 What playwright who lived through the dark days of the 2nd Punic 
War nevertheless wrote some of the best Roman comedies? Plautus.

Bonus 1: 	What writer immortalized the scandals of the 
Julio-Claudian emperors in a series of biographies? Suetonius.

Bonus 2: 	What writer of the High Empire stole the name of Ovid's 
greatest work and told the tale of Lucius transformed? 
Apuleius.

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 2:	Hercules captured me, and Psyche put me to sleep with 
drugged cakes. But how did Orpheus manage to get past me? He lulled 
him to sleep with music.

6.	 What do audeo, gaudeo, soleo and fido have in common? They are 
semi-deponents.

Bonus 1:	Give me the principals parts of audeo. audeo, audere, ausus sum

Bonus 2: 	Give me the principals parts of fido. fido, fidere, fisus sum

7.	 Who was Emperor when Christ was crucified? Tiberius.

Bonus 1: 	Who was emperor when Christ was born? Augustus.

Bonus 2: 	Who was emperor when the Peter and Paul were martyred? 
Nero.

8.	 What playwright who lived through the dark days of the 2nd Punic 
War nevertheless wrote some of the best Roman comedies? Plautus.

Bonus 1: 	What writer immortalized the scandals of the 
Julio-Claudian emperors in a series of biographies? Suetonius.

Bonus 2: 	What writer of the High Empire stole the name of Ovid's 
greatest work and told the tale of Lucius transformed? 
Apuleius.

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

6.	 What do audeo, gaudeo, soleo and fido have in common? They are 
semi-deponents.

Bonus 1:	Give me the principals parts of audeo. audeo, audere, ausus sum

Bonus 2: 	Give me the principals parts of fido. fido, fidere, fisus sum

7.	 Who was Emperor when Christ was crucified? Tiberius.

Bonus 1: 	Who was emperor when Christ was born? Augustus.

Bonus 2: 	Who was emperor when the Peter and Paul were martyred? 
Nero.

8.	 What playwright who lived through the dark days of the 2nd Punic 
War nevertheless wrote some of the best Roman comedies? Plautus.

Bonus 1: 	What writer immortalized the scandals of the 
Julio-Claudian emperors in a series of biographies? Suetonius.

Bonus 2: 	What writer of the High Empire stole the name of Ovid's 
greatest work and told the tale of Lucius transformed? 
Apuleius.

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 1:	Give me the principals parts of audeo. audeo, audere, ausus sum

Bonus 2: 	Give me the principals parts of fido. fido, fidere, fisus sum

7.	 Who was Emperor when Christ was crucified? Tiberius.

Bonus 1: 	Who was emperor when Christ was born? Augustus.

Bonus 2: 	Who was emperor when the Peter and Paul were martyred? 
Nero.

8.	 What playwright who lived through the dark days of the 2nd Punic 
War nevertheless wrote some of the best Roman comedies? Plautus.

Bonus 1: 	What writer immortalized the scandals of the 
Julio-Claudian emperors in a series of biographies? Suetonius.

Bonus 2: 	What writer of the High Empire stole the name of Ovid's 
greatest work and told the tale of Lucius transformed? 
Apuleius.

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 2: 	Give me the principals parts of fido. fido, fidere, fisus sum

7.	 Who was Emperor when Christ was crucified? Tiberius.

Bonus 1: 	Who was emperor when Christ was born? Augustus.

Bonus 2: 	Who was emperor when the Peter and Paul were martyred? 
Nero.

8.	 What playwright who lived through the dark days of the 2nd Punic 
War nevertheless wrote some of the best Roman comedies? Plautus.

Bonus 1: 	What writer immortalized the scandals of the 
Julio-Claudian emperors in a series of biographies? Suetonius.

Bonus 2: 	What writer of the High Empire stole the name of Ovid's 
greatest work and told the tale of Lucius transformed? 
Apuleius.

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

7.	 Who was Emperor when Christ was crucified? Tiberius.

Bonus 1: 	Who was emperor when Christ was born? Augustus.

Bonus 2: 	Who was emperor when the Peter and Paul were martyred? 
Nero.

8.	 What playwright who lived through the dark days of the 2nd Punic 
War nevertheless wrote some of the best Roman comedies? Plautus.

Bonus 1: 	What writer immortalized the scandals of the 
Julio-Claudian emperors in a series of biographies? Suetonius.

Bonus 2: 	What writer of the High Empire stole the name of Ovid's 
greatest work and told the tale of Lucius transformed? 
Apuleius.

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 1: 	Who was emperor when Christ was born? Augustus.

Bonus 2: 	Who was emperor when the Peter and Paul were martyred? 
Nero.

8.	 What playwright who lived through the dark days of the 2nd Punic 
War nevertheless wrote some of the best Roman comedies? Plautus.

Bonus 1: 	What writer immortalized the scandals of the 
Julio-Claudian emperors in a series of biographies? Suetonius.

Bonus 2: 	What writer of the High Empire stole the name of Ovid's 
greatest work and told the tale of Lucius transformed? 
Apuleius.

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 2: 	Who was emperor when the Peter and Paul were martyred? 
Nero.

8.	 What playwright who lived through the dark days of the 2nd Punic 
War nevertheless wrote some of the best Roman comedies? Plautus.

Bonus 1: 	What writer immortalized the scandals of the 
Julio-Claudian emperors in a series of biographies? Suetonius.

Bonus 2: 	What writer of the High Empire stole the name of Ovid's 
greatest work and told the tale of Lucius transformed? 
Apuleius.

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

8.	 What playwright who lived through the dark days of the 2nd Punic 
War nevertheless wrote some of the best Roman comedies? Plautus.

Bonus 1: 	What writer immortalized the scandals of the 
Julio-Claudian emperors in a series of biographies? Suetonius.

Bonus 2: 	What writer of the High Empire stole the name of Ovid's 
greatest work and told the tale of Lucius transformed? 
Apuleius.

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 1: 	What writer immortalized the scandals of the 
Julio-Claudian emperors in a series of biographies? Suetonius.

Bonus 2: 	What writer of the High Empire stole the name of Ovid's 
greatest work and told the tale of Lucius transformed? 
Apuleius.

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 2: 	What writer of the High Empire stole the name of Ovid's 
greatest work and told the tale of Lucius transformed? 
Apuleius.

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

9.	 Plato thought I was the first king of Atlantis. Homer though I 
was the father of Calypso. Hesiod thought I lived on the edge of the 
world, perhaps in Africa where a mountain range bears my name. My 
brother Prometheus sent Hercules too me, who talked me into fetching 
the golden apples of Hesperides. Who am I? Atlas.

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 1: 	Prometheus, of course, had his own problems, offering an 
unwilling feast every day to what type of bird? Eagle.

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 2: 	Prometheus the Titan wasn't the only one punished for 
stealing fire from the gods. What "gift" did Zeus have Hephaestus 
fashion and present to Prometheus' brother? Pandora.

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

10.	 Caesar, we say, was killed in 44 B.C. But no one connected to 
that event would ever have said such a thing. In what year A.U.C. 
was he killed? 710.

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 1: 	Many Romans wouldn't even have been so literate as to 
count the year from the founding of the city. What was the normal 
method of dating years in the Republic? By the names of the consuls.

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 2: 	Well, that wouldn't have worked well after the Republic 
fell. They used the year of the emperor's rule instead. What would 
be, in our reckoning, the 4th year of Tiberius' rule? A.D. 18.

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

11.	 Four verbs have irregular singular imperatives. I just want two 
of them.  Fero, facere, ducere, dicere.

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 1: 	But now I want the other two.

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 2: 	One of them is irregular in the plural. Which one and what 
is its form? Fero, ferte.

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

12.	 Most everyone thinks the Roman Empire "fell" in 476 A.D., but 
actually Roman emperors continued to rule in the East in unbroken 
succession until the year Constantinople was finally captured by the 
Turks.  What year was that?  1453.

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 1: 	There were even Roman emperors again in the West, after a 
lapse of about 325 years.  Who was the next Roman Emperor in the 
West after 476 A.D.?  Charlemagne.

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 2: 	Charlemagne saw himself as the Emperor of the Romans, but 
the revived Empire in the West has received a slightly different 
name from historians.  What was this Empire, which lasted thousand 
years from Charlemagn's coronation in 800 A.D. until it's abolition 
by Napoleon in 1806? Holy Roman Empire.

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

13.	 How would you translate the participle in the following 
sentence: Suos hortatus, Caesar equum suum incitavit. Having 
encouraged (urged).

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus1:	Translate the participle in this sentence: Cicero locuturus discessit.  About to speak.

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 2: 	Translate the participle in this sentence: Livius fabulam 
de regibus expulsis narravit. Expelled.

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

14.	 From whom did the Roman borrow the arch, gladitorial combats, 
the triumph and the toga?  Etruscans.

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 1: 	The first gladiatorial combats were given at what kind of 
event?  A funeral.

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 2: 	In the old-style family, who typically was responsible for 
making togas?  The mother.

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

15.	 Say in Latin "I live in Tusculum".  Habito Tusculi.

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 1: 	With what types of words is the locative used? Towns and 
small islands.

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 2: 	Some regular nouns also take the locative.  Tell me one.  
Domus, rus, humus.

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

16.	 What monster lived in the ocean, between Italy and Sicily, 
sucking ships down into the whirlpool?  Charybdis.

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 1: 	What monster lived close by on the rocks, luring ships to 
their doom?  Scylla.

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 2: 	How many men did Odysseus have to sacrifice to Scylla as 
he avoided Charybdis?  Six.

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

17.	 What is the general distinction between the pronouns se  and 
ipse, but of which translate as "himself".  Se = reflexive pronoun, 
ipse = emphatic pronoun.

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 1: 	What is the general difference between suus, sua, suum and 
eius, both of which translate as "his, hers, its"?  Suus = reflexive 
possessive (referring to the grammatical subject of the sentence), 
eius = non-reflexive possessive (not referring to the subject of the 
grammatical sentence).

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 2: 	What is the difference in meaning between the pronoun 
quidam  and quidem.  Quidam = someone / quidem = indeed.

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

18.	 If Latin literature has a "father of history" it was probably 
Fabius Pictor.  What great war did he tell the history of?  2nd 
Punic War / War with Hannibal.

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 1: 	What Greek historian told the history of Rome's rise to 
imperial greatness?  Polybius.

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 2: 	What Roman historian told the story of Catiline's 
conspiracy and the War with Jugurtha. Sallust.

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

19.	 What is the definition of a gerund?  Verbal noun.

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 1: 	What declension pattern does the gerund follow?  Neuter, 
singular only.

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 2: 	The gerund has no nominative form in Latin.  What takes its 
place?  The infinitive.

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

20.	 When recognized perform the following command.  Sta et sonum 
similem lupo fac. A howl.

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 1: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate 
angilice carmen de puella quae ovem parvam habebat. 

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  

Bonus 2: 	Now perform this command: Surgite omnes et cantate anglice 
carmen de tribus muribus caecis.  
